doctors rated number one by reasons
there's a finger in your ass magazine
doctors have held a position of high
esteem in our society for generations as
you can see in the 1930s film men of
Medicine in every US city and town there
is one house that everybody knows the
doctors available here are the services
of the man who by law is privileged to
practice the most respected of all
professions yes only doctors have the
privilege of shoving a stick into a
child's mouth and diagnosing addition
that we in the 1930s know as gross
throat the cure for it is drowning but
but what medicine may be the most
respected of all professions it is
important to know that not everyone has
the same experience when they visit a
doctor I think I would have been treated
completely differently if I had been
male you'll hear doctors and nurses like
oh they're just exaggerating you know
and not really listening to them because
it's a black person but it's just like a
white person it's just like oh my god
like this is serious
it's true if you are a woman and or a
person of color in the US you may well
have a very different relationship to
our healthcare system than a white man
so frankly who better to talk at you for
20 minutes about this than me the fright
of white men I'll get a sunburn watching
the Travel Channel I'm a walking cider
doughnuts pail filled with cake and
found at every farmer's market in the
Northeast but this is a discussion that
we need to have because what the vast
majority of doctors are doing hard work
with sometimes limited resources bias in
medicine is a serious issue and while
it's not the only factor in determining
health outcomes it can have a massive
effect so tonight let's talk about bias
in medicine in two specific areas first
sex and then race and in the words of
every therapist I've ever had
let's start with sex historically
women's bodies have always been fought
with judgments and misconceptions no
it's not a good idea the first two or
three days of your period you might get
children test cold Oh
try Peggy of course I can't go swimming
you know I've got the curse she's got
the curse she can't swim she'll
sink it's true in the 50's women refer
to their period as the curse but that's
not all
breasts were the haunted mountains butts
worth the valley of doom pregnancy was
the happening and giving birth was
called the babadook
it was a very very scary time to be a
woman and look things have clearly
improved since then but women can still
face an uphill battle to get quality
health care there are many many studies
showing this for instance they found
that women were less likely to be
referred for knee replacements than men
if they're over 50 and critically ill
they were less likely to receive
life-saving interventions and when going
to the ER with urgent abdominal pain
women were less likely to receive any
pain medicine just listen to one doctor
sum up how too many in her profession
treat female patients I think that a lot
of times women's symptoms especially
pain are attributed to emotional
imbalance or you know women being
hysterical or crying wolf about their
pain and that's absolutely wrong yeah of
course it is the only time it's
understandable for a doctor not to hear
a woman's complaints about pain is if
she's calling into the office and she's
got a TMT because the course keep
dropping out boom business I'm airing my
dirty diapers in public again
oh boy maintenance we look well some of
this may have to do with implicit bias
on doctors parts there was also a
systemic problem here where doctors may
literally know less about women's bodies
because historically medicine has
studied men's bodies which here means
those assigned male at birth as a proxy
for all bodies and as one researcher who
study this will tell you the reason for
that was incredibly dumb there's this
assumption that you are me with pesky
hormones
oh it's pesky hormones the idea is that
the fundamental things that are similar
between you and me
so that ironically the best way to study
you
is to study me because when you don't
have pesky farmers right we're studying
all the fundamental things in you
without this sort of nuisance stuff yeah
women are full of nuisance stuff which
is why medicine has long chosen to
believe that women are just hormonal men
or so children are tiny men dogs are
furry men trees a big hard still men but
and then who can fly fish a men who can
glub and volcanoes a man who for some
reason ejaculate larvae and this idea
that women are just men with pesky
hormones has led to some woman shaped
blind spots in medicine for decades
women were basically excluded from
medical research trials in part because
of a concern that their menstrual cycles
would complicate the results which you
would think would be all the more reason
to include them in tests because women
are half the population and can respond
to treatment or drugs very differently
and in some cases their exclusion was
utterly ridiculous as this news report
from the 90s shows in 1990 the Journal
of the National Cancer Institute
published this report which looked at
the impact of diet on estrogen
metabolism and it's links to cancer of
the breast and uterus all of the
subjects were men it's true they studied
a way to prevent cancer of the uterus on
people who did not have one that's
ridiculously unhelpful it's like
studying healthy conflict resolution and
only surveying the Real Housewives of
New York they resolved no conflicts
LuAnn still pissed off about two rindas
fishroom
remoteness turned up uninvited at
Barbara's clambake and Tinsley's furious
because they all laughed at the fact
that she froze her dead dog the group's
dynamic is still a mess and the shows
all the better for it and and when you
have the male body as the defaults
reference and doctors who might not take
women's pain seriously the consequences
can be deadly take heart attacks you're
conditioned to think of them looking
like they do on TV all the time you know
people grabbing their chest and then
falling over but for many women that is
not what they look like instead their
heart attacks present with subtler
symptoms like pain in the back or jaw
nausea and unusual fatigue and lots of
doctors miss that just look what
happened to Katherine Leon who went to
the ER with serious heart problems and
was told this the young doctor came in
very condescending thought I was just a
drama queen and he said it's not my job
to tell you what's wrong with you it's
my job to tell you what it's not and
it's not your heart and that was it I
was like well what do I do next
and he's like you go home Wow that
doctor managed to find literally the
only time that telling someone to go
home is bad advice because having a bad
day at work just go home and a party
stuck next to a girl who wants to talk
about Bitcoin go home you're on second
and your body grounds a single into left
field the outfielder picks it up and
throws to first is around third but you
realize he's overthrown go home go home
go home now but Kathryn Leon was having
a heart attack she should not have been
sent home when she's by no means alone
one study found that women who came to
the hospital with heart attack symptoms
were seven times more likely than men to
be misdiagnosed and sent home from the
hospital which is terrible the only
thing a woman should be seven times more
likely to do is recognize those Real
Housewives references from earlier and
you know what even that is not remotely
okay that show is both a nuanced and
searing portrayal of wealth power and
loneliness in Manhattan or universal
themes that should transcend whatever
superficial boxes in which is currently
confined it it's our much ado about
nothing an Andy Cohen is our Shakespeare
but that's not the point
it's a very good point in fact it's an
excellent point but it's not the point
we're making here which is sex and
gender bias can clearly distort medical
outcomes but they are not the only forms
of bias that can do that and now if I
may quote the inside of Donald Trump's
head when energy at one of this rally
seems to be flagging let's get to the
racism stuff because there is a huge
disparity in life expectancy between
black and white Americans particularly
for black men in fact when one study
tried to quantify what is called the
mortality gap they found some shocking
numbers which this documentary chose to
illustrate in the most jarring possible
way we found over 83,000 excess deaths
per year in the african-american
community alone 83,000 excess deaths
each year
that's the equivalent of a major
airliner filled with black passengers
falling out of the sky every single day
every year okay that's such a weirdly
specific way to put that you don't need
to take a number that's already a
disaster and put it in terms of another
disaster 83,000 excess deaths is like
four double-decker buses driving into
each other every six hours it's 32 hot
air balloons exploding every minute for
a week it's the death of Princess Diana
eighty-three thousand times okay I get
it it's pretty bad I get it now know
clearly clearly there are systemic
factors contributing to that number but
even just when it comes to contact with
the health care system there can be
appalling disparities there are again
many studies showing african-americans
have a lower likelihood of receiving
recommended care for everything from
pneumonia to hip fractures to multiple
cancers and what there's no one cause
for these disparities it certainly
doesn't help that as a study of med
students and doctors found just three
years ago misinformation about
african-american patients is rampant
the study found some doctors believed
there are biological differences between
the two races for example 25 percent of
doctor residents thought blacks have
thicker skin
holy ships you do not expect to hear
that at a medical school you barely
expect to hear it yelled across a table
by a racist grandfather at Thanksgiving
what are you talking about grandpa his
skin isn't thicker than yours and even
if it were that is not why you didn't
vote for him that is not the only insane
belief that that study found 14 percent
of second-year med students agreed that
black people's nerve endings are less
sensitive than whites which they
obviously aren't and 70 percent believe
that black people's blood coagulates
more quickly than whites which it
obviously doesn't and at that point I
wouldn't be surprised to learn 86
percent of them believe that Irish juice
is green on holidays
not not even just some Patrick's Day all
holidays even Yom Kippur that's the
worst time to ejaculate now now it is
impossible to say exactly where they
came by those beliefs but medical
textbooks are not immune from bias this
nursing textbook was available until
just two years ago when it was pulled
after it emerged that it featured
statements like and I quote Hispanics
may believe that pain is a form of
punishment and that suffering must be
endured if they are to enter Heaven
African Americans believe suffering and
pain are inevitable and Native Americans
may pick a sacred number when asked to
write pain on a numerical pain scale and
you expect that a textbook might have
typos or outdated information you do not
expect it to basically say Hispanics
think God is kinky and Native Americans
will tell you wizard numbers and
misconceptions like those can have
tangible effects on treatment just think
about it if a quarter of all medical
residents think that black people have
thicker skin and nurses have been told
that they think suffering is inevitable
that might lead to black patients pain
being treated differently which happens
and I actually think that Wanda Sykes
some days are best because of racism
black people we don't even get our hands
on opioids they don't even give them to
us
white people get open yours like they
did tax it amazes me how many open yours
you have a double
mastectomy
you know what they said my blood is
always frozen okay okay first
from now on advil should absolutely call
itself I hope you protein that is
non-negotiable gut has to happen the
second that's by no means unusual one
recent analysis found that black
patients were 34 percent less likely to
be prescribed opioids for pain than
white patients with similar conditions
and while there are a lot of good
reasons to prescribe fewer opioids my
patients are black is just not one of
them and the danger is if you
consistently have bad experiences with
healthcare you might be less inclined to
seek help that you need in the future
just listen to this woman who was
diagnosed with lupus described how she
was impacted by the response from
doctors when she sought pain treatment
it was just this belief that I was
making things up that what I was saying
wasn't real that I must be seeking drugs
or selling the drugs or some such thing
is that really what people would that's
that's what you were getting
absolutely absolutely and so what
happens is you start to develop a ton of
fear around going to the doctor yeah of
course she'd be frightened to come to
the doctor if you thought they treat you
like a drug dealer I'm terrified of them
and the worst thing doctors ever say to
me is mr. Oliver you're 42 and you
should no longer need to be bribed with
a lollipop to get a flu shot but I want
one I wonder what we pop I've been very
brave
give me a war we pack no I'm not that
all doctors are racist or sexist because
they obviously aren't but people have
biases and doctors are people and they
may have come up in a system that
intentionally or not as often discounted
the experiences of a major portion of
the population and their biases explicit
or implicit have life or death
consequences and there's perhaps no
stark expression of where sex and race
can negatively impact healthcare
outcomes than maternal mortality
currently the United States has the
highest rate of maternal mortality in
the developed world which is already
terrible but it gets even worse for
black women you're a woman of color in
this country especially if you're black
your odds of dying in childbirth are
three to four times higher on average in
our country why cuz you're not talking
about access to health care you're not
talking about money or education no and
this is gonna be hard to hear we believe
black women less when they express
concerns about the symptoms they're
having particularly around pain yeah and
that is hard to hear but it is worth
really underscoring what he just said
there these racial disparities exist
even when you control for socio-economic
factors like education or insurance
status we are literally disbelieving
black women to death and that is
appalling enough in theory but it's
heartbreaking in practice take Kyra
Johnson who gave birth to a son only for
things to go horribly wrong her husband
said that she waited hours for a CT scan
and by the time doctors took the
situation seriously it was too late she
died in surgery and to this day her
husband wonders what he could have done
differently I said oh wait at nights
thinking man like maybe I should have
grabbed somebody by their collar right
maybe I should have turned the table
over right would that have made a
difference
I definitely thought about the whole
issue of I didn't want to be seen not
only as angry but angry black man right
I'm not the smallest guy in the world
and what that would mean and how we
would be perceived and how he would be
treated as a result of that perception
when this first happened I would get the
question a lot what do you think it was
because she was black you think would be
different if cura was white it was
different color
and the way I answer that question is
the simple fact that you have to ask
that question is a problem yes it's a
huge problem because that's
absolutely devastating a woman no one
would listen to and a man who feared
that if he spoke up he'd be judged for
the color of his skin look I don't think
anyone in their right mind would be
comfortable with the idea of someone
getting worse medical care because of
their race or sex so given that we all
agree off that what can be done here
well ideally no we'd simply figure out a
way for no one to ever get sick again
thus making trips to the doctor an
embarrassment of the past you know like
VCRs or MTV giving out something called
the Michael Jackson video Vanguard Award
hold on
2019 they're still doing that is that a
difference Michael Jackson it must be
right why track missing Elliot into this
but but but there are also concrete
measures that the medical community can
take here standardizing care is a good
first step since 2006 California has cut
its rate of women dying in childbirth by
more than half in part by instituting
protocols for maternal care some
hospitals there now do things like
quantifying blood loss after birth by
gathering the sponges and pads and
weighing them on a scale that way the
doctors potential biases are removed
from the equation because if a patient
is bleeding too much
the scale will say so but that is just
one example to address one very specific
problem clearly we need to think much
bigger here and I know I am just not the
best vehicle for this message what we
really need is someone who can speak
with authority from real experiencing
here and luckily I know just the person
please welcome Wanda Sykes
Wanda wrong
one day
I'm so glad I'm so I'm so so glad that
you're here bet you are yeah it's just
cuz I was a bit worried that I might be
a bit too white to give advice on this
subject
well that's because you are oh yeah your
real wife yeah I bet you clap on the one
and the three don't you I obviously
wouldn't know how else to do it yeah so
you just gonna have me stay in here Oh
would you rather oh yeah I would oh okay
should I should I just
[Applause]
hello and welcome to last sad tonight
with spectacles Nick door key okay look
if you're a woman or a person of color
going to the doctor can be rough been
there done that got the eye blue
profile but there's some things we can
do first doctors and med students should
get bias training I know that doesn't
sound like fun
but it's one of those things that's not
fun but you should do it anyway like
reading with your kids trust me trust me
you don't want to hear that your child
has a reading problem and it's you
second we need more diversity in the
medical field
we need more non-white doctors in actual
hospitals not just the was made up by
Shonda Rhimes
and finally until we do those first two
things you've got to advocate for
yourself and if that doesn't work don't
worry I've got a back-up plan
it's called bring a white man
basically if your doctors ignoring you
just bring the white man to repeat
everything you said and if you're
thinking Wanda where the am I gonna
get fine one of those don't worry I've
got a white friend who loves complaining
to doctors and he's recorded some
messages you can use so let's say you're
having a heart attack and they're not
listening just take out your phone and
show your doctor this hey you know what
but it's not like no it's a it's a it's
a lady heart attack giving him an EKG an
MRI and a BLT if he asked for it look
and it's not just heart attacks
I got Larry to record messages for every
occasion my elbow hurts when I when I do
this I got like a whipping motion my
knee I can't bend it
I cannot squat my uterus is killing me
I've got some pesky hormones today
shouldn't have to say this but skin
thickness is pretty much the same as
everybody else's
talk to me to explain what's going on
with my ass but I'm gonna tell you
something it hurts okay
side to side and the crack and it's like
I don't know if it's coming from the
crack and that's why the sides heard or
if it's coming from the sides and that's
why the crack hurts
oh no I can't go swimming I've got the
curse
you can find all of those and more at
what's Larry's problem calm oh that is
so that's so great wonder but let me
just let me just ask quickly what if a
doctor still ignores you oh don't worry
I got Larry to record the white person
seven word mating call check it out I'd
like to speak to your supervisor thank
you so much